## Abstract {.page_break_before}

<!-- 250 words -->

Nucleotide excision repair is a primary DNA repair mechanism that removes bulky DNA adducts such as UV-induced pyrimidine dimers. 
Correspondingly, genome-wide mapping of nucleotide excision repair with eXcision Repair sequencing (XR-seq), provides comprehensive profiling of DNA damage repair. 
A number of XR-seq experiments at a variety of conditions for different damage types revealed heterogenous repair in the human genome.
By the assembly of the grey mouse lemur (Microcebus murinus) genome at chromosome-scale, we were able to achieve a direct comparison of DNA damage repair profiles between two primates; lemur and human. 
We derived fibroblast cell lines from mouse lemur and exposed them to UV irradiation.
Following repair events were captured genome-wide by XR-seq protocol 1 hour after the irradiation for cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPD) and 6-4 pyrimidine-pyrimidone photoproducts ([6-4]PP) distinctively. 
Mouse lemur repair profiles were analyzed in comparison with the equivalent human fibroblast datasets.
We found that transcription-coupled repair levels for CPD repair is different between two organisms.
Despite this, comparative analysis between human and mouse lemur fibroblasts revealed that genome-wide repair profiles of the homologous regions between two primates are highly correlated. 
This correlation is stronger for the highly expressed genes as well as the genes sharing high homology.
With the inclusion of an additional human cell line XR-seq data in the analysis, we found that fibroblasts between two organisms behave more similarly relative to two distinct cell lines from human.
These results suggest that mouse lemurs and humans, and possibly primates in general, share similar repair mechanism as well as distribution.
In the lack of a comprehensive epigenomic profiling of mouse lemurs, this study sheds light into the epigenetic map of the mouse lemur fibroblasts.
