## Introduction 

Nucleotide excision repair is an essential mechanism to remove bulky DNA adducts including UV-induced DNA lesions [@doi:10.1074/jbc.R117.807453]. 
As in other repair systems, excision repair starts with damage recognition. 
There are two subpathways in damage recognition step leading to two repair mechanisms: global repair (GR) and transcription-coupled repair (TCR). 
GR is active throughout the genome whereas TCR is only active on the transcribed strands as it is initiated by damage recognition by stalled RNA polymerase II (RNAPII). 
To date, many techniques have been developed to detect DNA damage and repair [@doi:10.1002/em.22365].
The approach of some of the methologies has been NGS-based, which allows answering genome-wide questions.
To reveal genome-wide excision repair dynamics, heterogeneity and associations, eXcsion Repair sequencing (XR-seq) was developed.
XR-seq technique directly measures the repair events by capturing the excised oligomer containing the lesion. 
It was found that TCR is more efficient particularly for slowly-repaired DNA lesions. 
For instance, among UV photoproducts 6-4 pyrimidine-pyrimidone ([6-4]PP) and cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer (CPD), CPD is more prone to TCR as it is less efficiently repaired by GR. 
Although DNA lesions might preferntially form at certain local sites in the genome, the overall heterogeneity of repair is majorly due to uneven repair efficiency throughout the genome [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1706522114; @doi:10.1038/s41467-018-05064-0]. 
Genome-wide heterogenous repair distribution is mostly caused by transcription and chromatin structure [@doi:10.1101/gad.261271.115; @doi:10.1073/pnas.1614430113; @doi:10.1073/pnas.1603388113; @doi:10.1038/s41467-019-08290-2].

To date, genome-wide repair maps were generated for model organisms including *Escherichia coli* [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1700230114; @doi:10.1074/jbc.C117.818807], *Saccharomyces cerevisia* [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1801687115], *Drosophila melanogaster* [@doi:10.1074/jbc.AC119.011448], *Arabidopsis thaliana* [@doi:10.1038/s41467-018-03922-5], *Mus musculus* [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1804493115], and *Homo sapiens* [@doi:10.1101/gad.261271.115; @doi:10.1073/pnas.1706522114]. 
TCR presence was verified for each of these organisms. 
For eukaryotic genomes, the consistent finding was the efficient repair in open chromatin regions.
Heterochromatin regions were found to be repaired at later time points.
Human repair profiles were extensively studied with respect to damage formation and chromatin states.
Whether regions in human genome that are efficient with respect to repair are organism-specific is yet to be investigated.

To study whether repair patterns are unique to the organism of interest we aimed to compare human and a deeply diverged non-human primate. 
Gray mouse lemur (*Microcebus murinus*) stands out as a promising model organism candidate because of its small body size, short gestation time (2 months) and fast sexual maturation (6-8 months) [@doi:10.1002/ajp.22423;@doi:10.1534/genetics.116.199448].  
A near chromosome level reference genome for the gray mouse lemur was recently sequenced and assembled [@doi:10.1186/s12915-017-0439-6]. 
With no surprise, it was shown that mouse lemur and human orthologs share ~91% identity. 
Although a robust genome assembly is available, we lack an in-depth understanding of this species' genomic features such as epigenetic maps, transcriptomes and methylomes.

Given that mouse lemurs and humans last shared a common ancestor at the base of the primate clade [@doi:10.1016/j.tig.2007.02.007], same cell types from human and mouse lemur should behave similary in response to DNA damage as a reflection of their deep homology.
With this motivation, we carried out a comparative study between these two primates to understand similarities and differences between their repair profiles.
We derived primary fibroblasts from mouse lemur and immortalized them.
We performed survival assays in response to UV stress, immunoslot blot assays and in vivo excision assays for both cell lines. 
From mouse lemur fibroblasts, we obtained transcriptomes, we exposed cells to UV and performed XR-seq.
XR-seq captured the excised oligomers as repair products for two main UV-induced damage types: (6-4)PP and CPD.
We compared lemur and human fibroblast XR-seq datasets with respect to their genomic repair distribution.
