## Results

### Excised oligomer characteristics

In vivo excision assay resulted in the excised oligomers containing UV-induced lesions (Fig {@fig:fig1}A).
Excised oligomers were captured for two damage types distinctly with specific anti-damage antibodies. 
The oligomer length distribution varies from 16 to 30. 
Two intense bands were observed, which indicate primary and degraded excised oligomers. 
The gel images show that the primary excised oligomer lengths vary between 23-25nt.
Through time course, gel images reflect a more intense secondary product band, suggesting higher levels of degraded excised oligomer with damage is observed at later time points. 
For human (NHF1) and mouse lemur, this trend is similar. 

Nucleotide excision repair in human, yeast and *E. coli* was shown to yield primary excised oligomers predominantly in lengths of 27, 24 and 13 nucleotides, respectively [@doi:10.1074/jbc.M113.482257; @doi:10.1073/pnas.89.8.3664; @doi:10.1073/pnas.1801687115; @pmid:6380755; @doi:10.1073/pnas.1700230114]. 
Mouse lemur resulted in excised oligomer distribution identical to humans (Fig {@fig:fig1}B) thus indicating deep homology with human. 
This is supported by an identical pattern of oligomer length distribution between human and mouse lemur that is independent of the damage type. 
For both CPD and (6-4)PP, nucleotide excision repair machinery incised 26nt oligomer as the predominant product. 
A small variance in oligomer lengths between in vivo excision assay and XR-seq might be due to the immediate exonuclease activity on excised oligomer for in vivo excision assay. 
Because of the TFIIH coimmunoprecipitation in excision repair sequencing technique, XR-seq primary products are less prone to degradation, possibly because of TFIIH protection of the excised oligomers.

### Identical CPD and (6-4)PP nucleotide frequency between human and lemur

Nucleotide frequencies of the excised oligomers between human and mouse lemur are identical for both CPD and (6-4)PP (Fig {@fig:fig1}C). 
Pyrimidine enrichment was revealed at 19th, 20th and 21st nucleotides for CPD and (6-4)PP for both organisms, which is in agreement with the incision site at 6 to 8 nt fixed distance to the 3' end of the DNA lesion. 
The nucleotide contents for CPD and (6-4)PP are different, as they were previously reported and discussed [@doi:10.1101/gad.261271.115].

![ Characteristics of excised oligomers upon repair of UV-induced damages. 
*(A)* In vivo excision assay for (6-4)PP and CPD are shown. 
*(B)* Length distribution of excised oligomers for CPD (top) and (6-4)PP (bottom). Human and mouse lemur are shown in blue and red, respectively. 
*(C)* Nucleotide frequency in the predominant oligomer (26 nt) for each primate and damage type. Representative data from replicate 1.
](images/fig-1.png){#fig:fig1 .white}

### UV repair efficiency of mouse lemur in comparison with human

To identify the overal repair efficieny upon UV irradiation we performed a colony survival assay. 
We seeded 300 cells and grew them for 16 hours. 
Cells were exposed to UV-C at 1 Joule m<sup>2</sup>/sec for variable time duration to reach indicated doses from in the range of 2.5 to 10 J/m<sup>2</sup>.
We counted cells for each dose and plotted a survival curve for lemur and human fibroblasts (Fig {@fig:fig2}A).
Based on the survival curves we infer that mouse lemur fibroblasts are more sensitive to UV relative to human cells. 
This suggests a differential repair rates between the two species which is possibly reflective of the diurnal versus nocturnal habits of humans and mouse lemurs, respectively. 

We then performed immunoslot blot assays (Fig {@fig:fig2}B).
Cells were exposed to UV-C at 10J/m<sup>2</sup>. 
To separate UV-induced DNA lesions we used specific antibodies for CPD and (6-4)PP. 
We quantified the remaining damage signal for each damage type for both organisms. 
Both (6-4)PP and CPD repair appeared to be more efficient in human cells compared to mouse lemur. 
In 2 hours (6-4)PP repair was completed in humans whereas in lemurs, it took 4 hours to complete (6-4)PP repair. 
After 32 hours of irradiation 20% of CPDs were still unrepaired for human cells. 
Unrepaired CPD ratio was more than 40% for mouse lemur cells. 
Survival and immonoslot blot assays are in harmony and they suggest mouse lemur cells have relatively low repair rates in comparison with human NHF1 cells.

![ UV sensitivity and repair rates in human and lemur fibroblasts. 
*(A)* Clonogenic survival assay (left) and the quantified results (right).
*(B)* Immunoslot blot repair assays to examine the repair kinetics of UV-induced DNA lesions for both organisms and each damage type (left).
Remaining damage levels at each time point were quantified and plotted (right).
All experiments were conducted in triplicates, and graphed data are presented as (mean+/-SD).
](images/fig-2.png){#fig:fig2 width=66% .white}

### Prominent transcription-coupled repair in mouse lemur

Nucleotide excision repair comprises two sub-pathways each of which distinctly acts on damage recognition. 
Global repair is the genome-wide mechanism that is active in any region in the genome, although its efficiency depends on the type of damage as well as chromatin factors. 
On the other hand, transcription-coupled repair (TCR) depends on the RNA polymerase II stalled at the lesion. 
Stalled RNAPII recruits transcription-coupled repair factor, CSB, to enhance repair. 
As TCR occurs only when RNAPII is stalled, it is solely active in the regions that are transcribed by this polymerase. 
Also, TCR is only seen in the transcribed strand of the genes. 
DNA lesions in non-transcribed strands are subject to global repair. 
A major rate-limiting step of nucleotide excision repair is damage recognition. 
Therefore, minor helix-distorting lesions such as CPDs are recognized more efficiently when they stall otherwise progressing RNAPII. 
For this reason, for the organisms having TCR, genes have asymmetrical repair between two strands; transcribed strand (TS) is repaired more efficiently compared to nontranscribed strand (NTS) [@doi:10.1038/nrm2549;@doi:10.1038/342095a0]. 

Global repair for (6-4)PP is much faster than for CPD [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkz035; @doi:10.1073/pnas.1603388113]. 
TCR only removes a minor fraction of the (6-4)PPs, and thus strand asymmetry between TS and NTS (TS/NTS ratio) is much weaker for (6-4)PP compared to the strand asymmetry of CPD repair [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1603388113].
CPDs, on the other hand, are harder to be recognized by global repair, and therefore it takes a longer time to remove CPDs from the genome. 
For this reason, at early time points (such as 1 hour after UV irradiation), we observe a strong TCR effect which is evaluated by the asymmetrical repair between TS and NTS. 
Here, we compared the genic strand asymmetry between human and mouse lemur (Fig {@fig:fig3}). 
We retrieved all annotated protein-coding genes from both genomes. 
We removed the genes that are closer to each other with less than 20kb in order to remove the signal that might have a "canceling-out" effect. 
We used 5277 and 3366 annotated genes for human and mouse lemur, respectively (see methods). 
We performed a meta-analysis where we aligned all transcription start and transcription end sites and calculated the RPKM (reads per kilobase per million mapped reads) values.
Interestingly, mouse lemur fibroblasts exhibited stronger TCR profiles compared to human cell lines. 

![ Transcription-coupled repair in mouse lemur and human fibroblasts. 
Average profiles of CPD XR-seq (top) and (6-4)PP XR-seq (bottom) over 5277 and 3366 annotated genes are plotted for human (left) and mouse lemur (right), respectively. 
Transcription start sites (TSS) and transcription end sites (TES) were retrieved from GTF (Gene Transfer Format) files for the two genomes.
Transcribed (red) and nontranscribed (blue) strand repair are shown in the downstream and upstream of TSS and TES, respectively.
10 kb upstream and downstream of TSS and TES were divided into 100 bp windows. 
XR-seq reads falling onto each bin were normalized to RPKM (reads per kilobase per million mapped reads). 
The XR-seq RPKM values were normalized by the shuffled RPKM values derived by mapped reads onto sites that are random genomic sites. 
Only replicate 1 is shown.
](images/fig-3.png){#fig:fig3 .white}


### Conserved repair rates between homologous regions of two primates

In order to compare and contrast the genome-wide repair profiles between humans and mouse lemurs, we retrieved the homologous genomic regions between the organisms (Fig {@fig:fig4}A). 
We aligned the two genomes and kept the regions that have at least 80% similarity.
Due to the low coverage of the XR-seq samples we removed the aligned segments that are shorter than 400 bases to eliminate the randomn effect due to scarce repair events. 
Lineage-specific genome duplications result in paralogs that can be co-orthologs to one locus in the other genome. 
This situation is known as the "one-to-multiple" orthology relationship. 
As we cannot be sure which one of the multiple paralogs in one genome is the "true" ortholog of a region in the other one, we filtered out one-to-multi kinds of homologous relationships and kept one-to-one homologs only.

1.0% and 1.3% of the genomes were taken into account with one-to-one homologs for human and mouse lemur, respectively.
4-5% and 2-3% of the XR-seq reads mapped to those regions for CPD and (6-4)PP, respectively.
The reason why the mapping rate of CPD is higher than (6-4)PP could be due to its slower repair rate; slowly repaired CPDs are more prone to the effects of chromatin. 
Because we applied stringent criteria to retrieve the homologous regions with at least 80% identity, they are likely to be more open compared to other regions in the genome.
Therefore, CPD repair events are mapped onto those regions more than (6-4)PP reads did.

We investigated the correlation between the repair profiles of the two species. 
Because excised oligomers have a certain nucleotide bias due to the damage site, we normalized the true repair signal (XR-seq) by the simulated XR-seq reads.
Simulated reads have the nucleotide content of the true XR-seq reads, however they are randomly retrieved from randomized regions of the homologous regions. 
With this approach we eliminated potential bias of the nucleotide content that creates a pseudo-correlation.
Although there is a clear difference in the relative TCR rates between two species (Fig {@fig:fig3}), homologous regions of two genomes exhibited a strong repair rate correlation; R values for (6-4)PP and CPD are 0.80 and 0.72 (p=0), respectively (Fig {@fig:fig4}B).
Not only repair but also transcription levels between two organisms are correlated (Fig {@fig:fig4}C).
The similar repair and transcription profiles between two cell lines are independent of their chromosomal locations. 
Chromosomal homologous region associations are dispersed as previously suggested [@doi:10.1186/s12915-017-0439-6].  


![ Comparative analysis methodology and correlated repair rates between human and mouse lemur. A) Approach to detect orthologous regions between human and mouse lemur. B) Scatter plots showing the normalized repair levels between two organisms. C) Mapped orthologous regions with repair and transcription profiles mapped at outer rings.
](images/fig4.png){#fig:fig4 .white}

### Repair profile correlation is associated with gene expression

To understand what factors are associate with the correlation of repair between these two highly-diverged species of primates, we examined the correlation strength and gene expression levels. 
We prepared RNA-seq data sets for mouse lemur fibroblasts and obtained RNA-seq datasets for human fibroblasts from a publicly available database (see methods). 
The strength of the correlation between the two repair profiles was found to be correlated with transcription levels (Fig {@fig:fig5}).
Highly expressed regions had better repair correlation between the two species.

![ Repair rate consistency in correlation with gene expression. The transcription levels of the orthologous regions were divided into quartiles separately for human and lemur. Out of the quartiles 10 bootstrapped subsamples were retrieved, and for those regions repair correlation was analyzed. Correlation coefficient (R values) are represented on the y-axis; quartiles are on the x-axis.
](images/fig5.png){#fig:fig5 .white}

### The same cell type from two primates have more similar repair profiles relative to two different cell types from the same organism

We cannot dismiss the possibility that the correlation of repair profiles between two primates could simply be due to the heterogenous mappability of the genomes. 
Such a correlation makes sense only when we measure the similarity of repair patterns relative to another dataset. 
For this reason, we used another human cell type, GM12878 - B-Lymphocytes to ask whether the repair profile of human fibroblasts is closer to lemur fibroblasts or to human lymphocytes.
We performed XR-seq for CPD as it yields relatively high genome-wide heterogeneity compared to (6-4)PP.
Although repair profiles between human GM12878 and NHF1 are also correlated (Fig {@fig:fig6}A), this correlation is not as strong as the one between human and mouse lemur fibroblasts.
Additionally, human and mouse lemur fibroblasts clustered together in the PCA plot (Fig {@fig:fig6}B). 
Within fibroblasts, biological replicates were grouped together. 
More interestingly, (6-4)PP and CPD samples for separated groups each of which has human and mouse lemur samples.
The two replicates of CPD XR-seq samples of human lymphocytes (GM12878) were clustered as an outgroup.
This result suggests that human and mouse lemur fibroblasts have similar chromatin and expression patterns and therefore have similar repair profiles. 
On the other hand, even though derived from the same organism, completely different human cell lines have a considerable variation with respect to repair patterns.
It is also interesting to note that although TCR profiles between two primates are quite different from each other, they share high similarity in repair profiles. 

![ Cell type-based consistency of repair profiles between two primates. A) Scatter plot or normalized repair levels between two human cell lines, GM18787 and NHF1, show correlation. B) Principle component analysis of 10 XR-seq samples. 
](images/fig6.png){#fig:fig6 width=100% .white}
